# QuACS: Variational Quantum Algorithm for Coalition Structure Generation in Induced Subgraph Games
This repository contains the code to reproduce the results presented in the paper *QuACS : Variational Quantum Algorithm for Coalition Structure Generation in Induced Subgraph Games*, published in the [20th ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers 2023 – Bologna, Italy](https://www.computingfrontiers.org/2023/).

# Contents
[Description](#desc)

[Methods](#methods)

[Results](#results)

[Usage](#use)

[Experiments](#experiments)


<a name="desc"></a>
## Description

We propose QuACS, a novel hybrid quantum-classical approach for solving the Coalition Structure Generation (CSG) problem for Induced Subgrapg Games (ISGs). In particular, the strategy is to follow a top-down approach and at each step explore an exponential number of possible next steps and choose the optimum greedily. The exploration of next steps and choosing the optimal can be formulated as a Quadratic Binary Combinatorial Optimization (QUBO) problem so that it is possible to leverage existing quantum techniques to solve efficiently. The algorithm can provide near optimal results in polynomial time.

Then we perform a comparative analysis in terms of time complexity between the proposed quantum algorithm and the most popular classical baselines. Furthermore, we consider standard benchmark distributions for coalition values to test the algorithm on small to medium-scale problem instances using the quantum simulators available in [Qiskit](https://qiskit.org).


<a name="methods"></a>
## Methods
<!-- The code is organized in different scripts in this repo to run the experiments. These scripts uses three main approaches in fetching the solution of the input CSG problem instance. -->
Since QuACS algorithm is an approximate solver, an exact solver [Improved Dynamic Programming (IDP)](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221454478_An_improved_dynamic_programming_algorithm_for_coalition_structure_generation) is also implemented to find the optimal solutions.
Regarding the proposed top-down approach, the important difference in the experimental setting is with solving the optimal split sub-task in the pipeline of QuACS. It can be solved using brute force enumeration which takes $O(2^n)$ operations.
A brief description of them are as follows:
- *Brute Force*: uses classical computing to solve the optimal split problem by exhaustively searching all possible ways of dividing a set of agents into two.
- *QUBO solver*: uses classical computing to solve the optimal split problem by reformulating it into a min-cut problem and further to QUBO, finally solving the equivalent QUBO using Qiskit APIs.
- *Quantum Simulator*: uses the [**aer\_simulator**](https://qiskit.org/documentation/aer/stubs/qiskit_aer.AerSimulator.html) provided in qiskit.

<a name="results"></a>
## Results

The results reported in the paper are contained in the text format in the _Reports_ directory.
The notebook _generatePlots.ipynb_ can be used to parse the report text files and visualize the results.
The plots are also saved and available in the _QAOA results_ directory.
<!-- Furthermore, in the path _./optimal_split_problem_, the notebook _bipartite_as_mincut.ipynb_ contains code executing only the optimal split problem using the three methods mentioned above for Laplace and Normal distributions, and view the results from a generated file named _bipartite_report\_<seed_number>.txt_. -->


<a name="use"></a>
## Usage

The scripts *utils.py*,*Utils_Solvers.py*, *min_cut_solvers.py* contains the helper functions in structuring the outputs and generating the reports.
*get_QUBO_coeffs()* function converts the min-cut problem instance into linear and quadratic terms required for QUBO formulation.

<!-- The script  contains the functions to use the APIs of dependencies like *dimod* for solving the input problem instances using the above three methods for finding the optimal split. -->

The script  *Experiments.py* contains the configurations to set-up for running the experiments.

<!-- The final report is generated by considering the best results in terms of two criteria: the best value for the optimization function and the best rank in terms of the probabilities generated for all possible binary strings. -->

There are three notebooks in this repository.
Two of them help to collect the experimental results, namely:
 - *Experiments.ipynb* contains the source code for selecting the solvers and running the experiments to finally generate a _.txt_ file containing the experimentally observed data like optimal coalition structure ($CS^*$), value of the optimal coalition structure ($v(CS^*)$), time to execute and approximation ratio compared to the $v(CS^*)$ obtained from IDP.
 - *generatePlots.ipynb* reads the file generated by the experiments and helps to generate plots illustrated in the paper.
 - *Experiments_OptimalSplit.ipynb* contains the source code for selecting the solvers and running the experiments for the exponentially complex sub-task of finding the optimal split as a min-cut problem.
 <!-- - *plot_theoretical_complexities.ipynb* considers the theoretical time complexity of various classical solvers like Integer Partition (IP), Bi-directional Search Technique for Optimal Coalition Structure Generation with Minimal Overlapping (BOSS), Improved Dynamic Programming(IDP), BILP-Q, k-Graph Clustering (k-GC), Coalition Formation with Sparse Synergies (CFSS), Coalition-Link (C-Link), DyCE. -->
 <!-- The code generates a plot to show the order of growth in compleixties of all the algorithms along with GCS-Q as a function of the number of agents.  -->


## Experiments

After having installed all the packages in the requirements.txt, a successful execution of the script will generate the output according to the following set of parameters.

The following are parameters to be set in the file *Experiments.py* before running 
the experiments:
 - *distributions*: list of function names, currently having 'Normal' and 'Laplace'.
 - *n_agents*: list of integers mentioning the number of agents considered for experiments.
 - *p*: number of QAOA layers for solving the min-cut problem.
 - *seed*: seed value for numpy to generate random numbers.
 - *IDP_brute_force*: Boolean value to specify whether using IDP exact solver for the running experiments.
 - *IDP_topdown_min_cut*: Boolean value to specify whether to consider top-down approach and solving the optimal split using brute force technique.
 - *IDP_topdown_qubo*: Boolean value to specify whether to consider top-down approach and solving the optimal split using QUBO solver from qiskit classically.
 - *IDP_gate_based*: Boolean value to specify whether to consider top-down approach and solving the optimal split using qiskit's _aer\_simulator_.


## Issues

For any issues or questions related to the code, open a new git issue or send a mail to
[supreeth.mysore@dfki.de](supreeth.mysore@dfki.de) or 
[antonio.macaluso@dfki.de](antonio.macaluso@dfki.de).
